# Levetiracetam instead of phenytoin
## Background
A natural experiment was performed at Royal Darwin Hospital in the Northern Territory of Australia in July 2014, when the primary choice of seizure prophylaxis in the ICU was changed from phenytoin to levetiracetam. Either drug is fairly effective as a first line against seizures.  There are many use cases in ICU that are very standard but not supported by any evidence that any drug makes a medium to long term difference.  In fact, there is some evidence that anti-seizure drugs for conditions such as brain injury are completely ineffective.  There is even some very confusing and unclear evidence that they may be harmful.
Levetiracetam may be more effective than phenytoin, and it has fewer drug-drug interactions and pharmacokinetic quirks, so overall it's a much easier drug to use effectively.  Especially with the background uncertainty that it gives a clear benefit, it's appealing to be able to use a drug that seems safer, *primum non nocere* and all.  Over this mood music of easier use of a newer but more expensive drug, a case series appeared in the [Medical Journal of Australia](https://www.mja.com.au/journal/2012/197/7/severe-drug-induced-hypersensitivity-syndrome-shared-hla-b-allele) which garnered a great deal of attention in the NT.  It reported an apparent cluster of DRESS, a severe rare drug reaction to phenytoin.  All the patients were Central Australian Indigenous men and all shared a relatively rare HLA allele, HLA B\*56:02.  The alarm raised was translated swiftly into an almost complete switch in ICU prescribing, formalised by a change in unit prescribing policy.
## Methods
All patients with qualifying indications had records sourced.  Each was checked for phenytoin or levetiracetam exposure, drug reaction, subtle signs of drug reaction in the bloodwork, and more patient centred outcomes such as length of stay, death and readmission. The proportion of each was calculated along with association odds ratios between the drug exposure and each outcome. 
## Results
There was no difference between those who received phenytoin or levetiracetam in the risk of death, the length of ICU or hospital stay and the laboratory profiles, after correcting for secular trends in reducing risk of death across time.  Those who received both drugs were more likely to die or have a long stay.
## Discussion
There is likely still to be heavy bias by indication, particularly accounting for the apparently very much higher burden of illness in those who received both drugs.  Nevertheless this is a reassuring dataset obtained following two different exogenously allocated treatments applied to similar patients with other interventions remaining roughly the same over time.  In retrospect HLA B\*56:02 may not be as common as anticipated and with a zero incidence with prospective follow  up, is clearly not a unipolar cause of DRESS.  There still remains the question of causation of the apparent cluster: this appears to be a statistical anomaly with regression to the mean over the subsequent years.
## Conclusion
A switch in ICU prescribing policy from phenytoin to levetiracetam does not seem to have caused any adverse events.
